The first topic we're gonna discuss
today is a declaration merging.
So, TypeScript and
JavaScript, well, sorry,
TypeScript lets us create different
kinds of things that can be imported and
exported across module boundaries.
So, if you imagine I've got a situation
like what I'm showing on the screen here,
we have an interface called Fruit.
We can create a banana that
is a value of type Fruit, and
we can see that fruits have a property
on them called name, mass, and color.
And we have name, mass and color here.
We can see banana is a named thing
with something associated with it.
Fruit is a name thing with
something associated with it.
We're exporting both of these things.
You can see on the tool tips here, const
banana: Fruit, interface Fruit, great.
So I'm gonna coin a term here, and
let's call these importable,
exportable things with a name.
Let's call them identifiers.
Internally, TypeScript
calls these a ts.symbol.
But JavaScript has
a concept called symbols.
So we're not gonna call them that,
we're gonna call them identifiers.
So let's change our
situation a little bit.
Let's introduce a function.
So we've got a function called fruit.
It takes an argument that's a string,
and you can see that,
depending on the string we pass in,
it's going to return an instance of Fruit.
So it's gonna return banana
which already exists, right,
that's that's coming from up here.
So if we look at the function Fruit,
it takes a string as an argument,
it returns a fruit.
It's a :fruit at the end, great.
Let's look at our export statement again.
So banana is as we left it.
But look at Fruit, Fruit has two things
with this little alias word before that.
It has a function Fruit and it has the
interface that was there when we started.
What we're seeing here is something
called declaration merging.
Fruit is a single identifier,
a single exportable or
importable thing, that now has
two things stacked on top of it.
We can take this one step further.
We're gonna add something
called a namespace and
I'll get into what a namespace is and
when you might use it.
It's actually not super
important to remember it but
it's useful when thinking
about declaration merging.
We're creating a namespace called Fruit.
It's got a function on it, appears to have
a function within it called createBanana.
It invokes Fruit, and it's gonna
get that banana instance returning.
Let's go down and look at our
export statement one more time.
Look at that, we have three things
stacked on top of each other.
We have a function, we have an interface,
and we have a namespace.
A function is a value, right?
We know we can create,
you can use like const fruit equals and
then put an arrow function.
Functions are just values.
You could pass a function into another
function, anytime you use a callback,
that's what you're doing.
Interface is a type.
We know its type.
Namespace is kind of something else.
I want you to think of it
as like another value.
It is a value,
we'll prove this to ourselves with
an evidence-based approach here.
But it's special enough that TypeScript
gives it its own slot
on an identifier here.
So, how do we tell
what's on an identifier?
LiWe see we've got three things stacked
on top of each other, and short of just
looking at the tooltip, we're gonna have
to resort to that for one of these things.
But how do we know
what's on an identifier?
So, there are a couple tests
that we can perform and
we're gonna go through
them one by one here.
So first, I'm gonna create
a bunch of different things.
This, clearly a value, right?
This is like a variable.
We're setting it equal to 4,
that's a value.
This very clearly as a type so
I'm creating a type alias,
it happens to be the empty
object type here.
The third thing we're
creating is a namespace.
I haven't really discussed namespaces but
I'm just borrowing the syntax here.
It says if we just took
the namespace Fruit, renamed it and
took everything inside of it out or we're
just putting another variable in here.
So those were our three things we're
going to use as we perform tests.
So we have tests for
checking whether something within
an identifier has a value on it.
We have something for checking whether
an identifier has a type on it.
And then finally, there's no great way
to differentiate between values and
namespaces using some
expression like this.
So this one you sort of have to hover
over it and look at the tool tip.
And namespace can pass for
a value in a lot of cases.
So this is the one where I have to say,
hover over the thing.
There's no expression you can write
that will only work if something is
a namespace,
the value stuff will work as well.
So let's convince ourselves that these
tests work by looking at some negative
test cases.
So here, we're trying to use a type
in the value position, right,
on the right hand side of
a variable assignment.
And it's saying it's a type,
only refers to a type but
it's being used as a value
here that's very clear, right?
It's saying there is no
value on this identifier.
Here is a namespace being used as a value.
This is reinforcing the idea that
it can be used in value space,
meaning in places where values
are the only things you can use.
Here, we're trying to use a value as
a type and it's telling you very clearly,
this refers to a value but
you're trying to use it as a type.
This means there's no
type on this identifier.
And then finally, namespaces, it's the
same test you perform as values, right?
You can't use namespaces as a type either.
You could use a type query,
but remember, type queries,
the whole point of those is
to get the type of a value.
Something like that and it would work.
But this here, you could also think
of this as proof that this is
a value cuz if you did this,
It's not gonna be happy here.
Type of is another way you could
test to see if something's a value.
You can't say type of and
then provide something without a value.
Great, so we know these tests work.